[MUSIC PLAYING]
[WAVES ROLLING]
>> There's a lot of ways we
can heal ourselves from trauma,
from heavy emotional issues
that cause tremendous amount
of depression of the body, and
of the mind, and of the spirit,
through a continual practice
of these teachings and this
technology.
[SITAR MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When most Westerners
think of technology,
visions of fiber optics,
computers, 3D printing,
and modern medicine
come to mind.
But technology is
an ancient concept
in India, where yoga's system of
postures, breathing techniques,
and meditation aimed
at self enlightenment
perfectly exemplifies
the original definition
of technology as a
systematic treatment.
>> Yoga is based on the
scientific system which
doesn't neglect any dimension.
We develop all the faculties
in a very balanced way.
Because of its
scientific approach,
everyone can practice
and get the same results.
>> We talk about yoga as
being a technology for raising
one's consciousness.
And if we look at the
body as a vehicle,
we look at the
systems of the body
as being parts of
that vehicle, we
realize that each
part has its own need
for balancing and stimulating,
just like your car.
These are techniques
that will help
you to arrive at
the place you want
to get to in a very systematic
way if you apply it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's really amazing how this
technology using the breath,
using meditation, using mantra,
has helped so many people
coming back from war, and
suffering post-traumatic stress
syndrome, and having
their lives totally ruined
because of their experiences.
The mind, it holds onto things
very deeply until something
comes along that can recalibrate
the way the nerves are working,
recalibrate the way the
mind is functioning,
emotions are holding things.
And that's what this
practice does for you.
>> What happens is that, by
a certain method of control
of energy, control of
the breath and the mind,
the energy withdrawn and is
taken into the inner chakras
or the cycle centers
in the spine.
Then because of
the magnetization,
the energy is
withdrawn more inside.
And you keep on
strengthening, revitalizing
the centers in the spine.
Then finally, you are able
to bring all that energy
to the point between
the eyebrows.
Then we get the experience
of this superconsciousness.
>> Yoga in general in the
West has been taught primarily
physical.
It's for health and
satisfaction of the body,
and our selfish desires.
A more traditional
view of yoga would be
the transcendence of the body.
The surrender of the
ego to the divine.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This ultimate connection
with the divine is thought to be
achieved through relating with
nature's five basic elements--
earth, water, fire,
air, and space.
>> Everything, from our sounds
to our language to the way we
behave, the way we talk is a
play of the five elements--
an example of this.
One of the main mantras
in the Kundalini tradition
is Waheguru.
And Waheguru mantra has all the
five elements balanced in it.
How is that?
"Wa" is the sound of the water.
[WATER RUNNING]
If you ever take a bottle,
and you pour the water out,
it is wa, wa, wa, wa, wa.
Next sound is "he."
"He" is the sound of the air.
(BREATHING DEEPLY) He.
Next is "gu."
"Gu" is the sound of the Earth.
If you go to a cave, if you go
underground meditation cell,
or if you go to your
basement and listen.
[INHALES DEEPLY] Mmm gu.
And the third is "ru."
"Ru" is the sound of fire.
Whenever you hear a
natural fire, whenever
you hear natural fire burning,
the sound is [ROLLED R SOUND]..
And the fifth
element is the akash.
And the sound of the
akash is silence.
The silence before the mantra
and in between the sounds,
the silence and the silence
towards the end of these four
sounds is the sound
of the ethers.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[ROARS]
[RAPIDS FLOWING]
>> The use of sound in
yoga cannot be overstated.
In fact, at the
time when Sanskrit
was thought to be
downloaded from the heavens.
Listening intently
to our surroundings
could be the difference
between life and death.
[SNAKE HISSING]
>> The tradition that this
came out of, our lives depended
on listening.
So to be able to listen meant to
be able to listen for if there
was a thunderstorm coming.
[THUNDER RUMBLES]
If there was prey in the jungle,
our lives relied on listening.
So these practices around
deep listening come out
of that point of view, that
listening and vocalizing really
were at the heart of life,
one of our greatest sources
of power.
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> While tapping into deep
listening is fundamental to all
yogic paths, Nada yoga is one of
the most ancient Indian systems
utilizing sound
for transformation.
Nada, meaning "to
flow," helps one move
through subtle
non-physical sound
so that consciousness can
be brought into harmony
with the universal vibrations.
>> One of the things that's
the most important for us
to realize on this path is that
Nada yoga is a practice that
came out of an oral culture.
Every single form of Nada
yoga is a form of meditation.
"Nad" means sound, comes
from the root "nad."
whether it's the stream
of energetic channels,
as in the nadis, or in
the war of sound, of Nada.
So Nada yoga is harnessing
the power of sound
as a yoga practice.
You're using the
sound in various ways.
So you're opening your
body to the vibration.
And if you bring a
little mindfulness to it,
one feeds into the other.
The more you vibrate the
body, the more it opens.
The more the body opens,
the more it vibrates.
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
The sound of the
tanpura [PLUCKS TANPURA]
is actually a symbol for om.
Everything takes form
out of vibration.
Om is the most elemental
form of that vibration.
It's that vibration before
it's come into form,
before it's come into time.
Om.
And so there is an understanding
that all of creation
is essentially vibration.
But this has no
linguistic meaning.
There's no story.
It's just pure sound that,
within three seconds,
shifted you.
So this is how Indian classical
music works with Nada.
It's very terse.
It's very compact.
It's very potent.
[INDIAN MUSIC PLAYING]
In one of the primary
music texts of India,
the "Sangita Ratnakara,"
they actually
have quite a long chapter about
how the energetic body is made
up and how different
sounds are thought
to come from different
parts of the body,
including the chakras
and then the nadis.
There's 22 major nadis.
And there's 22 major
shrutis, or tones.
So they found correspondences
between these tones
and the nadis of the body.
So the whole of Indian music
is created with this notion
that we are the sound.
The sound already exists.
We're aligning
ourselves with it.
[SITAR MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There are two types
of sound in Nada yoga.
You begin with the external,
or ahata, and slowly progress
into the internal, or anahata.
[SOUNDS GONG]
>> When you refer to Nada
yoga, you're referring to deep
listening practices.
They would start by
listening to chants--
for example, om.
But very quickly,
they would start
listening to internal sounds.
What the yogi is progressing
toward is to be able to hear
sounds inside, internal sounds.
The yogi is instructed to go
inside, to prepare the body.
So Asana, Pranayama, Kriya--
all preparatory practices to
make the yogi this finely tuned
instrument so he
could go inside and he
could hear the sound, of
course, of the breath,
but of the heart, of
the circulatory system,
of the nervous system.
And from there could start
to actually hear the unstruck
sound, the overtones,
that are happening
all the time, both
inside and outside,
and eventually what we call
overtones, or the anahat,
the unstruck sound.
One has to have a very
fine apparatus and capacity
for tension to be able to
hear the anahata, the unstruck
sound.
It's listening for that
ground of being-ness.
So they would receive
the instruction
to listen for the
sound of thunder.
[THUNDER RUMBLES]
Listen for the sound of a harp.
[HARP PLAYS]
Listen for the sound of a bee.
[BEE BUZZES]
And when you're
listening that closely,
the mind is not talking.
[SITAR PLAYS]
>> Om is presenting in
our body, mind, and heart.
So we have to find
out that sound.
That sound is everywhere.
Even an atom also is
full of that sound.
Om is happening everywhere,
and we have to find it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We have two
things in our yoga.
One is energy.
Second is consciousness.
When energy and consciousness
come together, life emerges.
So we cannot approach
consciousness directly from
Nada yoga point of view.
But we can approach
it through energy.
And one of the energy which
we can use is sound energy.
So this sound energy
has different levels.
And this sound energy's
different levels
are connected with different
levels of consciousness.
[FLUTE PLAYING]
>> So this Nada theory
is a Big Bang theory.
And that om word, it was
first a transcendental sound.
Later it changes and
becomes material sound.
[EXPLOSION]
So even big bang
is like a sound.
So idea of Nada yoga is that
because this universe was
created by the
sound or vibration,
we can take help of
vibration and sound
to reach to the very point
of the unity of the universe
when it was created.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CHANTING]
>> Through Nada, the mind can
be tuned to vibratory energies
that transcend time and space.
>> Chanting, it's
not about the voice.
Singing is not about voice.
It's about hearing.
Most of my life I didn't
know how to listen.
So then I started to
really practice listening,
listening to everything
that my sense--
hearing, picks up and
listening to the sound,
and just let it be.
And then every day, which
we chant twice a day
at the ashram, the
voice starts to come out
and when you're
chanting, something
like kirtan in Sanskrit, that's
very pure energy to begin with,
everything flows out.
[CHANTING]
Now the heart becomes open.
Everything flows out.
So I have to say that
voice is not mine.
It's a divine energy.
I'm just the instrument.
The throat is the body.
The voice is not mine.
[CHANTING]
[SITAR PLAYS]
>> The practice of listening
means the mind is stopping
talking, and we can truly hear.
The more subtle things we
listen for, the more quiet
the mind becomes.
So that's sort of the gist of
the Nada yoga, the Hatha yogis.
[SITAR PLAYS]
>> Fundamentally, all Indian
music is spiritual music.
It is temple music.
Just like Indian culture, if
you go into the depth of it,
it's core is spiritual.
So all music,
basically spiritual.
So for example, in Western
music, very sensual music.
When it is done,
we can come out,
because it is connected
with the world.
[DANCE MUSIC PLAYING]
But out of that certain
types of music is selected,
which can sort of bypass
ordinary consciousness
of the mind--
your thinking, your
rationalization,
analysis, and all kinds
of scattered parts.
In this part of
the Indian music,
there are different
vibrations that are created.
And these different
levels of vibration,
or types of vibration,
through them,
we can access different
levels of consciousness.
[TANPURA PLAYS]
[CHANTING]
>> Chanting and mantras
help oxygenate the brain,
reduce heart rates
and blood pressure,
and assist in calming
brainwave activity.
But it's the chant's
subtle vibrations,
rather than any literal meaning,
that give them their power.
"Laya" is a Sanskrit
term meaning to dissolve,
an advanced state
of mind where one
forgets all the
objects of the senses
and is absorbed only in
the object of meditation.
[CHANTING]
>> Laya yoga is an
outcome of Mantra yoga.
Usually we see laya yoga
and Mantra yoga as one
most of the time.
When your consciousness,
when your mind,
have dissolved into it,
instead of you putting an act,
the mantra have possessed you.
It's no more you in charge.
You are no more you.
You are the sound garden in its
vibrating, in its alive form.
No more effort.
The mantra itself
is running in you.
You are one with
the sound garden.
No more structure.
It has gone beyond
the structure.
The way the universe sings
the sounds, that is laya.
The way we sing the song,
it's called Mantra yoga.
[CHANTING]
>> These mantras, they
have a precise intonation.
These mantras are not
written by a conscious mind.
They are revealed mantras
so that has come down
to us from them directly.
From generation to
generation it is passed on.
It is oral tradition.
>> In the words of Yogi Bhajan,
somebody asked him, sir,
how do I know that I
have perfected my mantra?
He said, when you hear the
sound from the universe,
know that you have perfected
the sound, perfected the mantra,
perfected the laya yoga.
So everything sings that song.
When the planes are flying,
you hear your mantra in it--
that means you have
perfected the sound.
This is the same
sound the earth hums.
sound the galaxy hums.
This is the same
sound the sun hums.
And that's why we call laya
yoga the yoga to dissolve.
>> So there are levels
of mantra source.
So there's not only one type.
And they work on
different parts.
Some work on the body.
Some work on energy.
Some work on emotions.
And some work on thinking mind.
>> If you chant correctly,
you have direct access to that
treasure.
And it works beautifully.
There are prayers in nature,
And prayers have so much power.
You can achieve anything,
literally anything,
through prayers.
That is not the only
thing, because you
could be a master of
chanting a particular mantra.
[CHANTING]
But that will not
give you what it
takes to live life
meaningfully, unless you do it
with all your feelings--
with conviction,
understanding of the mantra--
and then put it into practice.
Then the mantra is useful.
>> We are losing the reality.
We are losing the scientific
way of spirituality.
And it is in market nowadays.
And for purity of teaching,
we have to do hard work.
And people have no time.
And they have no patience.
They want, immediately, results.
so they are ready to listen
mantra through online,
or through by phone.
But this is not a
traditional way.
Traditional way is
only scientific way.
So if you want to
really enjoy meditation,
you have to do
practice by yourself.
There is no way.
Otherwise you cannot sell it
like vegetables in the market.
So master said, every
day, morning, evening, you
relate with the absolute.
Take some power from there.
Enjoy there.
And go to bank, take money
from there, and enjoy market.
When you have right knowledge,
Vedic knowledge in yourself,
then this material
life is very joyful.
God sent us here for enjoy.
Blessings are brought to light,
but only whom those who have
the right knowledge of life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Coming up on Yogic Paths--
>> Enter Kali, with her wild
eyes and protruding tongue,
said to have emerged from the
third eye of Shiva himself.
>> Myths are ways of putting
the deep truths that come from
these levels of reality into
what I would call pictorial,
or story, terms.
>> Watch as Kali turns the
battle around by lapping up
Raktabija'a blood before
it hits the ground.
>> When we hear a story, it
goes in and it impacts us really
on a soul level.
And it can change
our consciousness.
>> So some of the Kali imagery
can be downright terrifying.
But why?
Why is Kali terrifying?
[MUSIC PLAYING]